With over two decades working in the environmental consulting and local government fields.
From leading waste reduction programs on the Sunshine Coast,
to championing natural asset management in Gibsons,
to advocating for public transit and EV infrastructure,
Jeremy's career has been rooted in sustainability.
And now, as the first BC Green member elected on the mainland,
he's helping shape a new chapter for the party.
So in this session, we'll hear from Jeremy on his reflections on the direction that the BC Greens are headed in,
the party's clean energy priorities, and we'll also dive into how those policies intersect with the realities
many of us are navigating on the ground.
From permitting to procurement, to indigenous partnerships, and economic realities.
So with that, please join me in welcoming Jeremy and Mary.
Thanks. Okay, that works.
Thanks, Ina.
So I'm really happy to be here, and it's very familiar to me because as a young engineer and environmental consultant,
in the 2000s, I used to attend these conferences back when it was IPBBC.
Some of you probably remember that, and I do see a few familiar faces.
So it's great to be brought up to speed, and it's great to be on the cusp of a new age for this industry.
I know that 15 years has been a long time, but there's a lot of excitement in this room.
So I got to work on small hydro projects in the Cleveland Valley, the Upper Bridge, Vancouver Island,
and up north as working on environmental mitigation and engineering constraints.
So, and now I'm an elected representative for the BC Greens.
It's a bit of a strange journey through local government, but we've elected two Green MLAs.
Neither of us returning.
We're brand new, so we're in a steep learning curve.
But right after the election, very tight election, as you remember, we were thrown into a negotiation with the government
to support them on budget and confidence motions, and we were able to agree on a series of projects
that we were going to work on together, shared priorities, health, housing, transit, forests, electoral reform.
The one that's probably of most interest to you is a full review of the Clean BC Climate Plan,
which is a year ahead of schedule, and we agreed the science is moving quickly.
We, the needs for energy are changing quickly.
So we've worked very closely with Minister Dix to establish some terms of reference
and then select expert panelists.
Maren Smith and Dan Vanilovic probably don't need any introduction in this room,
but they bring a lot of expertise to this table.
And so with input from stakeholders and the public and the Climate Solutions Council,
they are doing a full review that's supposed to be finished by October.
So I know people think of a review as a bit of a yawner and won't produce anything for you,
but this is a pretty critical stage for our climate plan.
As you know, we haven't been meeting our targets.
And we've unfortunately in a bit of a lull in terms of public enthusiasm for climate action.
I'm hoping and I'm very confident that it's cyclical and we will resume our focus on climate
when we get through some of these other challenges that we're facing.
But we're not meeting our targets and we need to figure out how to do that.
So updating from the 2018 plan and the scope for these reviewers is everything's on the table.
We're looking for a transformative change.
We're looking for a paradigm shift in how we tackle climate.
And this industry will be a huge part of that.
I'm not going to prejudge their results, but I know that electrification will be a major push.
So we're really excited for the previous call to power and the one that's coming up.
All of you are leading the way in this.
And government should be listening to you.
I'm really encouraged to hear some of the earlier presentations.
We're beating IEA projections for solar.
First Nations financing seems to be making major strides.
So what our Green Caucus thinks that we need is an overarching vision for power in this province.
Instead of lurching from call to call 15 years apart and rebates get brought in, rebates get cancelled,
we need a big picture energy pathways assessment.
And so a lot has been done.
There's been a big rush.
The tariff threat has caused this government to move quickly.
And in some ways that can be good.
But I have lived the permitting juggernaut, or sorry, the permitting gauntlet of 15 different ministries and 15 different permits.
I'm glad to see a one-window option.
As we all know, the BC Energy Regulatory hasn't been involved in this before,
so we're very concerned to see what their process will look like and how they'll tackle this.
And it's great to have Michelle speak to that earlier.
So we're looking at proposed legislation from this government that has some pretty significant changes
about how energy projects are assessed, including the major North Coast transmission line.
So if it promotes streamlining and it creates a one-window, that's great.
But we also need to make sure that we don't rush to get this wrong.
So we need to get this right.
And I know we all, and I share the frustration, the government moves can move quite slowly.
But to take some of these bills, Bill 7 is the most notable one that you'll have heard of.
Bills 14 and 15 are streamlining but concentrating a huge amount of power in the cabinet
rather than putting it through the legislature when you're duly elected representatives.
So to think that these bills will go from a draft 10 days ago to being law by the end of May,
that is extremely quick, and we believe that they need the proper screening.
So that's our job, to make sure that we don't sacrifice the rigor of environmental assessment
and the social license that we all know that we get from proper consultation.
So I can't stress enough that the B.C. Greens obviously support development of renewable energy
and are supportive of ways to speed this up so we can get these things built.
But we are very wary of living too fast and seeing a social backlash.
And we know that there is resistance to some of these, some communities.
So you bring communities along, allow First Nations to participate, and those are key to success.
We haven't heard that from some of the stakeholders so far, so we'll be examining the extent of this bill
and these bills and trying to figure out how to make them work.
So I don't, yeah, I'm not here to monologue.
Actually, I think Ina has one question, but I'd actually like to hear some questions from you,
but I also want to have statements in the form of questions because really you are the experts.
You've been dealing with this regulatory regime and this industry for years,
and I'd like to know how the province can harness the potential that's in this room.
And this really, clean energy should be non-partisan.
This is about how we, this is the way forward.
We all know this is the way forward, and we have to, we have some catching up to do.
But it should not be driven by partisanship.
So please think of a question or a statement.
I'd like to hear your thoughts on the bringing in of the BC Energy Regulator
and some of the other industry conditions and constraints.
And I'll go ahead and take one question first.
Okay, sounds good.
I did have five questions prepared, but Amelie Valeria was really eager to hear from the room,
so I'll ask my one, and then we'll open it up to the floor.
So thank you so much, Jeremy.
There's obviously a lot of thought going into the Greens approach,
and I know that everyone in the room is eager to connect that vision
to the work that we're doing in the clean energy sector,
so especially when it comes to delivering projects on the ground.
So my one question before we turn to the floor.
Your election 2024, most recently, last fall,
rightly identified the election platform document that your party put out,
rightly identified the need for long-term procurement targets
and workforce development.
As someone trying to plan and finance these projects,
I say predictability is everything.
So what would a stable, investor-friendly, clean energy plan look like
from a BC Green perspective,
one that delivers both on climate outcomes and economic certainty?
I know you touched on it a little bit, but let us know.
What's your plan?
Yeah, I mean, I think we all know that predictability is key,
and it's, like I've said, lurching between calls for power every 15 years
doesn't work.
I think, you know, the key piece for us is, like I said,
government needs to articulate a vision and how we're going to get there.
I think, you know, like any enterprise, there should be,
you know, there needs to be targets that we actually make.
The climate targets are excessively frustrating
because there's really no consequences to not meeting them,
and that's really not the way that we should be.
They need to be linked to some kind of consequences.
We're extremely keen on supporting technological innovation,
so, you know, the fact that geothermal and battery storage
is included in this call is really, really important,
and all the other innovation that's taking place.
We've just heard a whole lot about solar and energy,
community energy co-ops.
We do have a paradigm shift to make in this province.
It's not all resource extraction.
We can be a clean Canada, can be an energy superpower.
We need to look at domestic use,
and then the certainty that comes with funding and training
and job creation, we'll hear about skilled trades,
so we need to set the foundation for this now.
I mean, well, we needed to be setting it five to ten years ago,
and that's where we need to say,
we know where we're going.
BC Hydro might be building a big hydro-powered dam,
but we know we're going to need more energy,
and so this, you know, we saw the curves
versus the IEA projections on solar,
and I think we need to be bullish about planning for this for the future,
and be bold.
Any questions from the floor,
or should I go to the rest of the questions?
Well, it's a good thing I prepped five.
Thanks for sticking with us to the end of the day.
So you touched on it a little bit,
but let's expand on it a little bit further.
Given today's geopolitical and economic uncertainties,
energy security is coming up more and more.
How do the Greens view energy sovereignty,
and what role should renewable energy play
in strengthening BC's self-sufficiency?
Yeah, I mean, energy security, energy sovereignty,
and sovereignty is clearly important,
and, you know, in the discussions about an east-west energy grid,
I think, you know, and this crisis does create an opportunity
for us to find those,
and, you know, part of Bill 7
is about decreasing inter-provincial trade barriers.
I guess I just want to draw the distinction
between energy sovereignty and home,
and the supply of energy that we need here
versus massive exports of gas,
of the provide gas.
So to the Greens, that's a climate disaster,
and it's not necessarily part of our energy sovereignty.
We'd like to live within our borders,
you know, use the resources that we have here
to strengthen that sovereignty
and move forward with that.
It's not necessarily about export.
And I think, you know, the transition is key
to where we land in this.
If the U.S. is going to back away from renewables,
then maybe that's an opportunity for us.
I know you're not all seeing that on the ground yet,
but that's what we would hope to, you know,
create those conditions that allow that to happen.
Okay, thank you.
I see that we've got one question that's come in.
So the question is,
what specifically do the B.C. Greens want to change
with Bill 14?
Is there a balance between regulatory efficiency
and environmental protections?
Yeah, thanks.
That's a great question.
It's trying to achieve that balance.
And Bill 14 is, I'll say,
less challenging for us than Bill 15
because Bill 15 is just a blanket cabinet
that determines what's a significant project
and it goes ahead.
It could be a very streamlined environmental assessment process
that is essentially what cabinets,
cabinet decides.
Bill 14 is, you know,
it's about renewable energy,
so we are trying to be supportive.
We're trying to work our ways through it.
But the changes that we want
are really about transparency and oversight.
If, you know,
if B.C. Energy regulator is going to regulate these,
that's great.
They're currently not as transparent
as, say, the Environmental Assessment Office,
but also the cabinet decisions
that are going to set that process
need to be transparent
and they need to be accountable.
It's, you know,
with Bill 7,
we agreed that we would
have a legislative committee of all parties
to make it nonpartisan,
have a look at the regulations
after they're established.
And at least that gives the opportunity
to point out what's not working,
find the unintended consequences
and maybe change course.
If it's all done behind closed doors
of the cabinet,
then that's not going to work.
It's not,
that's going to build more mistrust
in government
and it's going to create more of a backlash,
which I don't want any of you to see
because I think these projects
are really important.
So the balance is more about transparency
and oversight of making sure
that these processes
don't get short-circuited
and to the detriment
of really all of us.
Okay, thank you.
I think we've got time
for just one last quick follow-up question.
It's actually a question
that I put together
and I feel like it goes hand-in-hand
with the one that was just asked.
Specifically around,
I feel like your party
has been a little bit critical.
I watch for the question period
and I've seen some of the remarks
or heard some of the remarks
with regard to the most recent procurement,
pricing, so on and so forth,
and obviously permitting reform.
As someone working directly
in the industry and sector,
I'm curious,
who are you consulting with
to form these positions?
Are you talking to developers,
Indigenous nations as partners,
local communities as part of that dialogue
or does it mostly happen
within the policy and advocacy sphere
and circles?
Yeah, great question.
Victoria can be a bit of a bubble
and that's, you know,
I've spent a lot of time there
in the last few months
and I'm looking forward
to getting back to,
back to, you know,
get grounded in the sea and sky
and the rest of the province.
So there is,
there is some, you know,
policy pieces
that is a bit disconnected
in Victoria.
I've heard from some developers
and I'm here to, you know,
put my name out there
and hear from more.
I would say we take most
of our guidance
at this time
from First Nations.
So for example,
Union of BC and Indian Chiefs
has come out strongly
on Bill 15
and we believe
that they have,
they really have a strong argument
to make about
the free prior
and informed consent
and participation.
Same with First Nations
Leadership Council
and then when it comes
to some of these
local governments
are also, you know,
throwing up caution.
Not so much
about the renewable energy
Bill 14
but about Bill 15
and the infrastructure
projects in general
kind of steamrolling
little governments
has been done
in the past
and I would argue
it's not good
for the overall process.
I don't think
it's good for business.
I don't think
it's good for,
you know,
public trust
and institutions.
So, yeah,
the people
that we're listening
to are, you know,
to some degree
you're kind of
typical green advisors
but we,
my job,
you know,
I got into this
because I thought
we needed more people
with a technical background,
more engineers
and scientists
and politics
and so
I don't listen
to anybody
and if there's
proponents
that have,
you know,
really strong opinions
about how this
should be done
I would love
to hear from you
and I've got some cards
and you can find me
online
but it is really
important to hear
the people doing it
on the ground
there are people
who are sitting
in offices
as we all know
who haven't done
this work
and they need
to hear from you
and sometimes
that can be
really difficult
to get that message
through
so I'm open
to hearing more
and I think
that's kind of key
that's what government
needs to do too
and sometimes
we get on this
ideological track
and we get tunnel
vision on what
we should do
and we're just
trying to make sure
that doesn't happen.
Thank you very much.
So, I'm afraid
that that's all
the time
that we have.
Jeremy, thank you
so much
for being here today.
we appreciate it.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
